---
title: /s/useful/hateful 
layout: post.liquid
is_draft: false
published_date: "2019-06-1 22:25:00 +0200"
---

**UPDATE**: Mastalab developer changed his opinion and I did not judge his
behavior correctly before. He reverted all the changes after he got no response
from the Plat Store. These changes were praised by the hateful groups. It's also
paid now. I don't support actions Fedilab has taken since this post was
published. I don't support harassment he received for reverting these changes
neither.

If you're not following so-called "meta" of the Fediverse let me bring you up to
date. There were some news that nazi-run "social network" which lost multiple
hostings and was kicked out of app stores, which burned tons of inverstors' cash
on nothing gives up on their own development and wants to adopt Mastodon and use
Mastodon-compatible apps.

As one of the contributors to the [Tusky](https://tusky.app), my first thought
was "we should block the hell out of them on the app level". Later Eugen
[proposed](https://mastodon.social/@Gargron/102184195834215862) the same thing.

Then Toot! [did that](https://mastodon.social/@tootapp/102185365923885685). And
Fedilab did that. And others [did as
well](https://mastodon.social/@sengi_app/102194358508642906). And I'm hella
proud of them all.

And then the response wasâ€¦ I don't know if you expected that but I did not
anticipate such a hateful response. Of course it harmed "free speech" activists
(who totally don't support nazis of course).

I want to make it clear. Letting racists spread hate wasn't my goal. It wasn't
Eugen's goal when we was developing Mastodon. It was the goal of furries, queer
people, people of color, poor people, neuredivergent people who developed,
supported and used Fediverse. It wasn't my goal when I was hurting myself both
physically and emotionally because I wanted to finish a feature for Tusky to say
that those beautiful weird people are not valid. Listening and spreading nazi
bullshit was never on my agenda, quite the opposite thing. Frustration with
Twitter unwilling to deal with Nazi is one of the driving forces behind
Mastodon.

Now you tell us, app developers, that we shouldn't do that. That we should be
risking to be banned from the stores because of your twisted notion of free
speech.

Why did I link to other's posts but not to Fedilab one? That's because it cannot
be found. Guess why.

You are either useful idiots or nazis. Honestly, at this point it doesn't even
matter. I want you to get your head out of your ass and do something useful with
your life instead of harassing people who try to end oppression. 

They will come for you too.

Don't you even dare.
